so we're back to to multivariable
calculus and before I begin a new topic
I wanted to to add a couple of things to
our discussion last Thursday about
formulas for the area in polar
coordinates remember we discussed polar
coordinates and one of the questions
which arise it here is one of the
questions which write it here is to find
the area of the following kind of
picture you have a curve which is given
by the equation R equals f of theta
where R and theta are the two polar
coordinates which we introduced last
time right and in this polar coordinates
natural bounds for such a forchette such
an area would not be the vertical lines
like X equal ax equal B the way you know
we used to do it
in rectangular coordinates that's the
old picture now it's more natural to to
give bounds in terms of the angle theta
so it's going to look like a sector like
this between some angle alpha and beta
so we will assume that alpha is less
than equal to is less than beta and
theta will be between alpha and beta and
so we look at this figure which is
bounded by the line theta equals alpha
theta equals beta and and the curve this
is the curve and the question is to find
area of this so I just briefly touched
on this at the very end of last lecture
and I just wanted to tell you how to get
this formula
which I roll down without without
explaining it last time so the idea is
again to to break this to break this
picture into small into small angles
which would be some within some angle
Delta Theta and say here we'll you'll
have R and and just look at the area of
this sector in the disk right so we
approximate now our curve not by not by
horizontal lines or line segments but we
will now approximate our curve by a
small segment of a circle because that's
more natural that's a more natural
object in the polar coordinate system
okay so so the question then becomes
what is the area of of this of this
little sector in the polar coordinate
system the analogous picture would be
like this so we would have some Delta X
and Delta Y right Delta Y and so the
formula for the area would be just Delta
a times Delta Y right and or more
precisely in fact we don't look at it as
a Delta Y but we just look at it as a y
coordinate or graph so it would be more
precisely Y times Delta X and that's
what after applying the procedure of
breaking into small pieces give us the
formula for for the area in terms of an
integral like this no idea in other
words Y Delta X the elementary area
gives rise to this integrand y DX so we
have to approach this problem in exactly
the same way but now instead of
calculating this area right here we need
to calculate the area of this wedge of
this little wedge of this little sector
and this actually not so difficult to do
because see the point is that we know
the area of the entire disk
so if you have a disk of radius R we
know the entire area what's the area of
the disk pi times R squared right Arius
pi times R squared and okay so now
suppose we were given say one quarter of
the disk what's the area of the of the
of this of this quarter of it of the
disk will be one quarter of this right
so that would be one quote why one
quarter because the angle enclosed here
is PI over two and so one quarter is PI
over two divided by two pi which is the
like the full angle of the disc so in
other words if you want to calculate the
area not of the entire disk but of over
part of the disk which is enclosed
within the angle of PI over two you have
to multiply this result PI R squared by
the ratio of the angle which is enclosed
to the total area of the disk so it
would be PI over two divided by two pi
right so that would be one quarter of PI
R squared which of course we knew in the
first place because clearly this is
going to be 1/4 because there are four
pieces which are exactly the same
but let's suppose you are in a pizza
restaurant and you are you have a piece
like this with angle theta and they
didn't cut it in a very uniform way so
you don't know exactly it's not PI over
it's not PI over four is nine PI over
six or PI over three whatever and you
won't calculate what area how much pizza
you got and then compared to how much
your friends got say maybe they got more
so it should they should share maybe to
give you back give you back some so what
would be the answer well we should argue
in exactly the same way as before before
that angle theta was PI over two and
what we did we took the ratio between PI
over 2 and 2 pi and now instead we'll
have a ratio of theta to 2 pi that that
that's what will represent the T's that
we got
as opposed as a sort of the ratio of
that piece to the entire disk to the
entire pizza and therefore the area
would be PI R squared times theta
divided by 2 by 2 pi right so pi cancels
out and you end up with 1/2 R squared
times theta that's the area of the
sector of angle theta which is exactly
our question except in asking this
question we called it Delta Theta
instead of theta so this area is is 1/2
R R squared Delta Theta and that's the
end look of this formula Y Delta X so
just like this formula Y Delta X gives
rise to this integral this formula for
the elementary area of the video of the
elementary wedge of angle Delta Theta
will give rise to the integral from
alpha to beta 1/2 R squared D theta
which is exactly the same just kind of
replace Delta theta by D theta and
that's how we get that formula which I
wrote down at the end of last lecture
so to summarize the key to calculating
the areas like this is to be able to
break the figure that you got into small
pieces which will then look like
elementary figures like in this case
would be Lin Elementary rectangle which
is where I magnify blowed up and I show
it there calculate its area and then it
gives rise to the formula for the area
of a general picture like this whereas
in the polar coordinate system you do
exactly the same but you kind of follow
the shape of the figure is different
because the coordinates are now
different so now we split it into little
sectors like this where the angle is
Delta Theta I magnified one of those
pieces right there
I found the area of that little piece by
thinking about pizza and calculating it
right and and then I put all these
little pieces together and this gives
gives rise to this integral ok any
questions about this so that's the way
to calculate that's the way to calculate
the area in polar coordinates and there
is a similar formula also for the arc
length in polar coordinates but the
formula for arc length I don't want to
spend time on it because we really take
the formula which we derived in the
rectangular coordinates about a week ago
and we just make the substitution where
X is equal to R cosine theta and Y is
equal to R sine theta and then just see
what comes out what comes out is is some
some formula in terms of R and theta
which you can then use to calculate the
arc length so that's the way we do it
for the arc length here it's more
conceptual because we change the point
of view slightly instead of looking at
rectangles we look at these sectors it
wouldn't be wise to try to break this
into rectangles because they don't fit
in this picture what six perfectly in
this picture are these little sectors so
then we need to calculate the area of
the little sector which we've done here
okay so this speaking of pizza analogy
this were the leftovers from last
lecture and now
it's not it's not what you say it's how
you say it you know the delivery is
somewhere I'm working on it now so now
we go we move on to our next topic and
the next topic is vectors and geometry
of space and space here means
three-dimensional space which surrounds
us you see up to now in the last three
lectures we talked about objects which
are defined on the plane here I've been
drawing curves on the plane and we
discussed various things about those
curves like arc length or various areas
which are enclosed by those curves but
the basic point the most important
aspect of what we've done up to now in
this class is the fact that we have
worked exclusively with object confined
to a plane and by a plane I mean the
blackboard or sort of infinite an
infinite extension of this blackboard in
all directions right all our objects
have been defined on this plane but now
we want to move on as I told you the
very beginning we have in this class we
are going to study not just objects on
the plane but also object in space in
the three-dimensional space and in the
3d because we live in a
three-dimensional space if you don't
think if you don't count the time so the
in fact we live in four-dimensional
space-time but that that would be topic
for the next calculus class I guess the
four-dimensional space-time
now we'll do here each class we do
two-dimensional space
the plane and C dimensional space so
technical space to me is more
interesting because it feeds more
objects more now it's it's not just
curves and there are a lot of
interesting curves which are appear in
space which cannot which are not
confined in any particular plane but
also perhaps more interestingly it
contains objects of dimension higher
namely two-dimensional objects the
surfaces like a sphere for example or
this list this wastebasket these are all
surfaces if you if you ignore the fact
that we actually do have certain
thickness so what we'd like to do
ultimately in this class is to
understand the geometry of those
services as well as curves and to be
able to answer various questions about
them like finding their areas
and even more even more sophisticated
things so what we do what we need to do
now is to sort of lay the groundwork for
this in other words we have to develop
some formulas because how are we going
to represent curves how we're going to
represent surfaces in a
three-dimensional space what's the most
efficient so always check for batteries
before you begin so in space we need to
we need to develop some technique in
order to attack this problem and the
very first thing that we should talk
about is the coordinate system because
you know on the plane it sort of goes
without saying that we we started out
with whenever I start writing drawing a
diagram drawing a picture during a curve
I draw this coordinate system we can
it's almost like a reflex I say usually
we call them x and y the to coordinate
after last week we kind of advisor now
we realize that this is actually not the
only coordinate system that we have
available for for the plane for instance
the polar coordinates provides us a
different coordinate system but this is
the basic one and we should start
thinking about a similar coordinate
system in the three-dimensional space so
this is the first step if we have to
make
coordinate systems now of course the
problem is that even though I'm going to
talk about the three-dimensional space
I'm still going to draw things on a
2-dimensional blackboard right so of
course I cannot draw this wastebasket on
on this on the Sun on the blackboard
what I can draw is really projection so
I kind of we kind of create the illusion
that there is some depth in the picture
and we try to imagine that the three
demons the third dimension is there
somewhere
so the the way we know we usually would
draw coordinates would be like this so
that of course the point is that they
are not on the same blackboard only this
one and this one lie on this blackboard
and this one is sticking out he's
sticking out by what we are looking at
kind of slightly from above and and
that's why it appears to us this way so
now we want to we want to label these
coordinates in a certain way in the on
the two-dimensional plane we label them
X and Y and in fact some of you may have
wondered why we label them X and Y and
not I'm not for Y and X not in the
opposite not in the opposite order why
not like this of course in a sense it is
the notation it's arbitrary we have
chosen with letters once and for all so
in a way you can say that it's not a
meaningful question because it depends
on what we mean by x and y but of course
what is important here is not so much
which letters we use by the ordering the
implicit ordering between x and y x
comes first and y comes second because
that's how they are ordered and alphabet
right so we could use y&z and again we
it will be assumed that Y goes first and
0 second so there is actually a basic
asymmetry between these two coordinates
x and y and we
talk about as much we haven't talked
about this much when we talked about
curves but in fact now is a good time to
to discuss this and to realize that
there is a basically symmetry the point
is that you could work with a coordinate
system like this X Y or you could work
with the coordinate system quite X and
these are not equivalent to each other
there is no way to transform one into
the other without removing them from
this plane of course if I were able to
maybe I should draw it more like this if
I were able to pick it from the plane
and flip X and y I would of course then
I will get back to this picture x and y
that is a more traditional picture with
all right
but we cannot flip them within the plane
you can argue well what if we just try
to move this coordinates like the you
know on the clock and kind of move them
and make them go through one another but
that's not allowed because then Y would
have to pass through each other and at
that point they will cease to be a
coordinate system they will become
parallel to each other so that's not
allowed so in fact you think about you
will see that there is no way to
transform one into the other
there's no way to transform one into the
other by by moves confined to this plane
and that's a very important point which
tells us that actually our claim has two
different orientations choosing one or
the other with coordinates which
coordinate system with the other
coordinate system gives it arian tation
and the funny thing is suppose that
there was another class behind that
blackboard and there were people there
like a mirror image of this one the
bizarro world if you will and suppose
the work is you know sitting there and
also learning multivariate calculus then
this one one of them the first one would
appear to them as a second and
conversely I mean not exactly but if you
if you rotate that that's exactly what
you get so in other way
variant ation from this side there is
orientation from this side when you look
at the blackboard from this side and
there is orientation of this blackboard
from the other side on the bizarre world
side and these are two different
orientations there's a two different
worlds and you can transform one world
into another within the plane within the
confines of the plane if you go into the
summation space you can do that you can
just pick it up and flip them but inside
the two-dimensional space you cannot do
that at first it appears that the kind
of a nuisance and you may think that's
not a very important point but actually
and in fact for the plane it's not so
important but in three-dimensional space
it becomes more important and that's why
we emphasize it in three-dimensional
space we also have different choices of
writing coordinates labeling of labeling
coordinates and in three dimensions we
will label coordinates and XYZ and of
course again the most important point is
not so much which letters we use by the
ordering in which they appear in the
water of course would be the natural one
one two three just the way they appear
and the alphabet but then the question
is how do you assign where there are now
many choices to assign these letters to
to this coordinate axis and the question
is are we going to get always the same
coordinate system in other words are
going to get coordinate systems which
can be transformed one into another by
moves within the three-dimensional space
and so now since I've shown you that
include emotional space on the plane
that's not true in other words on the
plane there are two different coordinate
systems which cannot be transformed into
one another you would not be surprised
to know that actually here as well in
three-dimensional space there are also
in equivalent coordinate systems but you
might be surprised to know that again
there are only two choices not more than
two so the choices are it's basically
the one which we will always use will be
like this XYZ and the other choice which
would a lot use which is not equivalent
to this one which is which is the
desired world coordinate system is this
one
and then again in other words we switch
X&Y just we did before on the plane just
the way we did before on the plane if
you try the other choices for example
you put X Y Z like this there you will
see that there are many different ways
there are six different ways to label
them you will see that that picture can
be transformed by simple rotation into
one of these two pictures so really
there are only two inequivalent ones up
to rotation within the three-dimensional
space these we could go into the
four-dimensional into four-dimensional
space
if the war force dimension that we could
visualize just the way we can visualize
the third dimension when talking about
the plane we would actually be able to
pick it up and transform one coordinate
system into another in that
four-dimensional space but since we
don't have a fourth fourth dimension or
more precisely the fourth dimension time
is kind of elusive it's not easy to
visualize it so within the
three-dimensional space we cannot do
that so we have to agree from the
beginning on what is the rule what is
the rule for labeling these coordinates
because we have to do it now because
from now on we have to use the same
system so we are on the same page or on
the same blackboard now what is the rule
and so the rule is a different ways to
phrase the rule and the rule is is in
the book it's explained by using fingers
but I always forget that so I'll tell
you the rule which I use which is you
know I grew up in Russia and we use the
rule which is called the corkscrew rule
and this is not to say that Russians
like to drink
but anyway it is called the corkscrew
rule and the way it works is like this
if you rotate the core screw from X to Y
so that here is the corkscrew
I kind of draw the most basic one
if you rotate it from X to Y then this
thing will go in the direction of the of
the C of the z axis right in other words
if you well it's not a good picture
because then the bottle would have to be
upside down but you see what I mean so
if you think about the corkscrew going
from X to Y which is natural right going
from X to Y is like going from the first
quadrant to the second in going from X
going in making rotation as if you were
moving the XCore x coordinate system to
the Y so X access to the Y axis then the
screw will move move in the direction of
the z axis so that's the rule which I
find easy to remember even if I don't
have a core screw only it's easy to
remember but you can use whatever rule
you want you just have to remember that
there is such a rule and to draw this
picture in this way okay so that's the
first point that we have to make about
this the second point is we have to
develop we have to develop some tools
for representing objects on on this on
this in space okay so the first I
already told you that the objects will
be mostly mostly interested in we're
still looking for battery but again no
luck so the objects that we are mostly
interested in a curves and surfaces but
in fact there are simpler more
elementary objects namely points so
before we talk about you know it's
complicate matters like curves and
surfaces let's talk about points in the
case of a plane we know how to represent
a point which is draw up the
perpendicular lines onto the x and y
axis
right and say we get X 0 and y 0 and we
represent the point as X 0 y 0 like this
and we are going to do the same in the 3
dimensional space so I draw the same
coordinate system and I'm thinking ok if
I go from X to Y is going to Z so that's
how I should put them because if I put
them in the other way I would have to
move the corkscrew this way and it would
go down so she would have to go this way
so this is a good orientation this is
this is orientation we've chosen and our
mirror image will have the opposite
orientation so it will have a point we
also can represent it by which
coordinates and now they're going to be
three coordinates obviously because we
are in three-dimensional space and the
way we find these coordinates is as
follows we draw up the perpendicular
lines line from this point to the plane
x and y now you have to at this point
you have to use your imagination and you
really have to think of x and y as a
plane which is sticking out like this
and the point is actually not here it's
not it's not in the zy plane but it's
here so you've got I can't show you
because my line of my hand is busy with
the microphone but you can you can see
I'm trying so this is a plane and the
point is here so you drop the
perpendicular down like this so you get
a point on the plane which is the XY
plane now I draw it like this so the
point is somewhere in space and that's
that's what that's what it drops so now
I get a point in the XY plane but a
point in the XY plane we already know
how to represent we just drop the
perpendicular lines to the x axis and y
axis so what we got already is y 0 and X
0 coordinates of this of this point the
two of the two of the three coordinates
what about the third coordinate it is
tempting to draw a perpendicular like
this but that's not true right to give
it really a depth to give it the
illusion of a three-dimensional picture
I have to do it in the following way I
have to connect the origin to this point
which is the which is the point I got by
dropping my original point on the XY
plane and I have to connect to the
z-axis by a parallel line so this one
and this one are parallel to each other
and that's going to be the v-0 book
coordinated you see the point is that
this is perpendicular to this entire
plane so in particular is perpendicular
to this and that's why the z axis is
perpendicular to this line so what I'm
doing really is I'm rotating
perpendiculars to each of the three
coordinate systems but the way I drew it
it's slightly complicated because I'm
using the two-dimensional projection of
the picture it would have been much
easier if I had a three-dimensional
model of this whole thing so then you
would see more clearly what the
coordinates are but I think it's fairly
self-explanatory here so if we have this
picture then we will say that the point
has coordinates x0 y0 and z0 and this is
incomplete analogy with the situation
that we have the picture that we have in
two dimensions so nothing nothing
surprising here what else do we need to
know we need to know the distance
between two points right so for instance
we would like to find fine oftentimes
let me use a different chart oftentimes
we might might want to find the distance
from from this point to the origin let's
call this our
so we need a formula for this distance
and in two dimensions we know that this
distance is computed by very simple
formula namely square root of the x EOCs
squared plus y squared and now the
formula is going to be very similar it's
going to be the square root of x squared
plus y squared plus Z squared okay so so
very similar instead of sum of two
squares like this you have a sum of
three squares and then you take the
square root and that's how you calculate
the distance from this point to this
point and it's very easy to prove this
by using pythagoras theorem and it's in
the book I'm not going to get into that
it's very easy all right
what if we were what if we were to
calculate the distance between two
different points actually so you could
have a point P and then you have another
point P Prime and say here you have
coordinates x0 y0 and z0 and here you
have coordinates x1 y1 and z1 for this
one so the distance so you see the point
is that this you can find the distance
you can just parallel transport this
interval to the in such way that the
first point would end up at the origin
and if you do that the second point will
have coordinates which are just the
differences between the coordinates of
the original two points so this point
will have coordinates x1 minus x0 y1
minus y0 and z1 minus e0 ok
so the distance let's call it what's
going D here a distance will be then
according to this formula the square
root of x1 minus x0 squared plus y1
minus y0 squared plus z1 minus z0
squared just like this is it clear to
everybody ok and and this already gives
us a way to describe a very important
surface on in space name is here because
the sphere is defined as the set of all
points which are equidistant from a
given point so for example let me erase
something let's talk about the sphere of
radius R with the center at the origin
these are all points whose distance
opens P whose distance to the origin
origin I denote by X Y this letter 0
this is not to say I don't mean the the
number 0 but I mean this point it's
really not 0 but it's point all looks
like 0 so points whose distance to the
point O to the origin is equal to R and
R is it some fixed number right so what
does it mean it means that the square
root of x squared plus y squared plus Z
squared where x y and z are coordinates
of the pointy
we'll have to be equal to our because
that's exactly the distance and if we
say that the distance is equal to our
that that's that's the equation we get
now it's it's what it's a good idea to
square both parts both side left hand
side on the right hand side so then we
get the equation x squared plus y
squared plus Z squared is equal to R
squared and that's remarkably similar to
the equation of the circle also compared
with the circle circle for which the
equation is x squared plus y squared
equals R squared
here now we have a third variable and so
we just add the third square to the left
hand side but otherwise equation looks
very similar so now we have an equation
of the outer sphere with with centered
at the origin and again you see remember
the rule which I explained to you at the
very beginning that if you want to
calculate the dimension of an object you
have to take the dimension of the
ambient space in this case three and
subtract the number of equations here
I've written one equation so the
dimension drops by one and we get a
two-dimensional object so we get a
sphere which is two-dimensional
two-dimensional object it is a surface
surface is by definition a
two-dimensional object and likewise we
can write the equation for a sphere
which is centered not at the origin but
at any given point by using this foreign
oil so if I say that this is equal to R
that would be sphere of radius R
centered
at the point P that will give equation
for x1 y1 and z1 with x0 y0 and z0 fixed
being the coordinates of the point team
all right so we already have some
rudimentary knowledge of the
three-dimensional space and we know an
equation of one basic basic surface in
it so what's the next step the next step
is to introduce objects to to introduce
a new tool to introduce objects of a
different kind which you have not used
yet in this course this objects are
called vectors and you will see that
these objects are very very useful for
precisely for studying the kind of
questions that we'll be interested in
like finding areas representing objects
and so on so the next step is to is to
talk about vectors so how many of you
know vectors all right so maybe I should
just go home okay but let me just go
briefly oh let me give you an overview
so I will not dwell on it too much then
so what is the vector a vector is an
object which is which is different from
numbers which we have studied so far so
so far we studied different options we
studied we know numbers we know points
for example on the plane points on the
plane are not numbers in a represented
not by a single number by by two numbers
right and in fact they are not they're
more somehow than two numbers because
they are emitted a point is a geometric
object which is positioned somewhere on
the plane or in space
so point is something which has a
position which is a position on a plane
or in space and the vector is an object
of yet another kind which is
characterized by two properties it has
the magnitude or length and it also has
a direction so so we usually draw
vectors as as as directed line segments
so it is convenient to draw a vector as
a line segment like this connecting a
point A to point B and you see when I do
that I give it two properties one is the
direction because this arrow points in
that direction and the second is the
magnitude or the length and the
magnitude is that there is the distance
between the point Point a and point B
okay but now the question is how do we
how are we going to represent vectors in
in practice in other words in practice
we will represent point by their
coordinates so we should discuss also
how to present vectors by something like
coordinates and various operation on
vectors what kind of things can we do
with vectors and here there is a saddle
point which is very important which is
that which is that in fact vector is not
really a picture like this but vector is
really what I said something which which
is just determined by its direction and
and its magnitude in other words if you
take and now if you take a parallel if
you take a parallel transport of this if
you just move it to another pointed or
directed segment like this which say
points a prime and B Prime and you make
sure that the directions are exactly the
same in other words that these two lines
are parallel and they point in the same
direction and the lengths are the same
the next
we will not distinguish between these
two vectors you see we will not
distinguish between them so the vector
is not really pointed a pointed segment
or directed segment it's a whole class
of directed segments a vector is this is
one representative of obvious vectors
this is one possible way to represent
our vector as a directed segment going
from the point a but you might as well
start at the point a-prime and you would
represent exactly the same vector so
usually we will denote vector by a small
Latin letter like a and we'll put a
narrow above it and in the first
approximation you can really think of a
vector as just an arrow like this which
has a directional magnitude but you have
to realize that many different error
arrows represent the same vector namely
all parallel arrows parallel to each
other pointing in the same direction of
the same length represent the same
vector so then of course the question is
how can we possibly work with these guys
because there are there are so many
possible ways to represent them well
that's where we have to start using our
coordinate system
so we draw our coordinate system and
again we remember the rule XYZ now as I
said the same vector a could be it could
be represent in many different ways but
to find such a way we have to pick the
initial point once we pick the initial
point then if it's already the fact the
arrow is determined by that if we're
doing that vector a but amongst all the
points on the plane once we introduce
the coordinate system there is the
origin there is a special point so we
might as well we might as well draw any
presentative from this class from this
whole set of possible arrows
representing this given vector we can
draw one of them which starts at the
point at the point of the at the origin
of this three-dimensional coordinate
system so the result is and I'm trying
to draw it parallel to this one in some
sense that although in my previous
discussion I kind of I was kind of
working on the plane but now I'm working
in space so in fact this end point is
not necessarily on the plane is not
necessarily part of the blackboard but
it could be again hanging somewhere in
the middle like on this picture right so
now the vector a gets a much more
concrete realization it is the pointed
interval or directed interval a directed
segment but now it goes from the point
all from the origin to some point T so
that's already much less ambiguous in
other words once you introduce a
coordinate system you have a preferred
representative for all possible arrows
giving you the same vector and then what
we'll do is we will write that a is
equal to OC or in this case will arise
as a
- a D or a prime D Prime
in other words different notation in
which you use the initial point and the
end point and again put put for the air
on top so from this point of view it
looks like a vector is a set is
essentially just determined by this its
end point because we agree to use as the
initial point the origin so the only
freedom we have is where to put the end
point so it looks at first glance it
looks like there's no difference between
a vector and a point but this is
misleading you have to realize that this
is misleading and actually there is a
lot more to the vector then there is to
a point even though when we represent it
in this way the vector will essentially
be determined by its end point once you
Center it or make the initial point to
be at the origin and really the main
difference is in the meaning of this in
a physical meaning physical sensation of
of a vector as opposed to a point the
point is just a point it's located
somewhere and it knows nothing about the
rest of the space but vector really is
something else here we talk about the
vector being appointed interval but in
fact a much better way to think about it
of a vector it's much better the thing
that vector is the transformation of
space a vector is a shift of space
because what do you need to know if you
want to shift something what do you need
to know well it will be much easier to
to express this in instead of instead of
a three dimension space it will be much
easier to explain this on the plane so
let's use this analogy so I have a table
I have this chair okay so it's on the
plane so think of it as a kind of
representation of a point on the plane
where the plane is the power or the
podium really okay so I want to shift it
so I move it in this way what do I need
to know - what do I need to say - in
order to explain how to
to move it in other words I asked one of
you to move it I have to explain in
which direction and how far right so and
suppose I ask you to ship everything in
other words I can ask some workers to
come here and shift this podium I will
say I want to be closer to you so I want
to move this volume you know whatever
one yard closer what does it mean it
means that each point of this podium
will be moved by one yard in the same
direction that's the vector a vector is
rule by which you shift all points and
then if you look at a particular point
like a point a then a vector will
displace it or shift it to a point B if
you look at another point a-prime this
same vector the same rule will shift it
to point B Prime and the point the
origin will shift it to this point P so
this is a much better way to think of a
vector as a as a rule for displacement
for sort of parallel transport of the
entire plane or the entire space if you
have such a rule then you know where
each point goes and that's what each
arrow represents and now it becomes much
more clear why different arrows as long
as they are parallel and have the same
magnitude correspond to the same vector
because they are part of the same rule
part of the same shift rule you should I
mean yeah any questions about this this
is an important point to remember to
kind of understand better with the kind
of stuff that we are going to do with
vectors all right but that sort of a
physical interpretation but now more
more concretely we would like to we
would like to work with vectors and try
to represent them
in much the same way as we represent
points say so a point has three
coordinates so now we want to represent
vectors also in a very concrete
algebraic way what i talked about up to
now is kind of geometry i draw pictures
and I explain the geometric meaning but
now I would like to do some algebra I
want
my vectors bye-bye some coordinates or
some algebraic objects and if clear what
we need to do we simply need to place
the vector the initial point of the
vector at the origin and we have to keep
track of the end point and the end point
will ready learn how to how to describe
we describe it by three coordinates x0
y0 and z0 right so if that's the case
then we will write the following we will
write that a is equal to x0 y0 and z0 so
what happened we are using exactly the
same information as the information
provided by the point team but because
now the point P is really not the
central object but it's something which
is just we just sort of an exhilarating
to understand the vector because that's
the end point for the point at interval
which we obtain when we apply our
displacement at the origin right so the
point p0 has played a secondary role
here nevertheless the point P has a very
nice representation by x0 y0 and z0 so
we might as well use this information
because it's uniquely determines our
vector because we agreed that the
initial point is at the origin so all we
need to know is the end point and the
end point is just this so that's why
this information is sufficient to
represent a given vector but when we
write it like this we want to
distinguish this notation from the
notation which I use for the point P
itself for the point P itself we use
notation with the round brackets and we
don't want to write it here like this
because if we want to write like this we
would be saying that this is the point
but it's not a point as I keep trying to
explain to you it's not really a point
the point in question here named to the
point P is really just the end point of
the vector but the Delta has a lot more
it carries a lot more information or has
a different geometric interpretation
than just a point so we have two
separate annotation for the vector and
station four the point and when we do it
we use this angle angular brackets
instead of the instead of the round
brackets and to someone it may appear
like we are too pedantic and it may feel
like what's the difference well the
difference is is what we'll see now that
vectors actually have a lot of structure
we can add two vectors to each other
we can multiply a vector by a scalar and
so on a point a point doesn't have such
a structure or points don't have such
structures we are not allowed to add two
points we are not allowed to multiply a
point by a number a point is just a
point it's static it's just is there a
vector is a kind of a dynamic thing
which like I said is a transformation of
the space of shifting everything in the
same direction and by the same magnitude
so if you have two vectors to side
shifts you can actually do them you know
one after another and therefore you get
a third vector you get the sum of the
two vectors and so on so in that sense
the vector really is a different object
than the point and that's why we really
have to distinguish between vectors and
points and use a different notation so
this is not a notation number one
notation number two we amongst all the
vectors that we have on the plane we
introduced the basic ones the basic ones
and the vectors which go from the origin
in the direction of one of the three
axes I mean from the origin in case you
want to apply to the origin but in fact
as I said you can you can apply to any
other point as well so these are the
this'll be following three vectors one
of them one of them goes along this axis
and has length one as uniquely
determined by this because remember
vector is uniquely determined by
direction and the magnitude so amongst
all the directions in space once we
introduce coordinate system you have
three basic directions XY and z so why
not use those three vectors but then you
have to say which magnitude and the
simplest magnitude would be one so you
got yourself three different vectors
this one this one and this one
and we'll call them I J and K okay and
so the point is that we can also write
this vector as x0 times I plus y0 times
J plus Z zero times K in other words we
can decompose any vector as a
combination of multiples of the three
basic vectors which of course
immediately back the question is to what
do I mean by addition by the addition of
vectors and what do I mean by
multiplication of a vector by scalar but
I'm kind of slightly jumping ahead
because I know that you already know
most of this material let me just remind
you let me just remind you that a simple
rule how to add two vectors there is a
so-called parallelogram rule do you
remember the parallelogram rule yes or
no no Oh someone said yeah but most
people don't remember should I remind
you I remember okay so the rule is like
this if you have two vectors a and B and
you want to calculate what is a plus B
and the way you do it is you apply the
two vectors to the same point again a
vector is a rule it's a displacement
rule so each point knows where it goes
right so now we have two vectors we have
two rules so let's apply let's apply
both of them to the same point and it
depends if you're enjoying the problem
you're solving there will be some
natural point to which you would want to
apply apply them now to find a plus B
what you need to do is you need to draw
a parallelogram which is spanned by this
two vector
in other words you draw a parallel line
to this one parallel to this vector and
at this point you draw a parallel line
to this vector so there is some data
parallel and this and this are parallel
and then these two lines will intersect
somewhere and that's your that's the
endpoint of the sum so that's the vector
a plus B which is this is a and this is
B then that's a plus B explanation of
this rule like I said it's better to
think of a vector as a displacement rule
so now you've got yourself to
displacement rules a and B each of these
rules can be applied to any point
whatsoever
okay let's apply first let's apply first
of them a and then apply B unsexy flee
let's apply them one after the other so
first we apply a now we have to say to
which point do we apply it well let's
apply to this point the end result is
that we get here to this point after
this I would like to apply the
displacement will be and I like I said
this place will be can be applied at any
point here I drew the result of its
application to this point what will be
the result of its application to this
point well I have to take a parallel
line of the same length this will be a
directed interval which will represent
the same vector right so I end up the
net result of this to up to two
displacements this one and this one is
that I end up at this point
that's why the composition of a tool or
the sum of the two vectors is this
vector so it's very simple geometric
interpretation if you draw the picture
using this parallelogram which is called
parallelogram rule if you draw it using
this triangle is called the triangle
rule but the essence the meaning is the
same
is this clear okay
we can also multiply which can also
multiply vectors by by scalars when I
say scalar I just mean usual numbers
real numbers what does it mean well here
we should think we should think of our
vector as a direction and magnitude when
we multiply by scalar we we well it
depends on what kind of scale it let me
let me rephrase it if you multiply by a
positive number multiplied by a positive
number this will be a vector in the same
direction and the magnitude will be C
times the magnitude of the original
vector so the picture will be something
like this this is the original vector
let's say you want to take this is a and
you want to a to a is going to be like
this so this distance will be twice the
distance away right and you have the
same direction if you want negative two
or if you want a negative number it will
have to be the opposite direction so
this is for example negative 2a so same
direction C less than zero opposite
direction opposite direction so you have
two operations addition of two vectors
and multiplication of a vector by scalar
and here I combine these two operations
I take my vector I and my a x x0 what do
I get
well according to the rule I have to get
something which goes again along the
x-axis and now has length which is equal
to the two x0 times the length of this
guy but the length of this guy just like
the lengths of the second guy and the
third guy J and K is equal to 1 so when
I multiply by X 0 I get something which
has length x0 so it's just a vector
which ends at this at this point and
likewise if I take J times y 0 I get a
vector which ends at this point and if I
take the third one K times Z 0 I get
this one and now it's not difficult to
see that if you take the sum of this
vector this vector and this vector you
will get this one I'll leave it clearly
for you to figure this up so that's
that's how you get the second the second
representation of a vector this is the
first one where we just keep track of
the coordinates of the end point this is
a little bit more descriptive because it
really emphasizes the fact that it is
the displacement is a superposition of
three displacements one in the
x-direction one in the Y direction one
in the Z direction alright so what's
next next we have to work out some tools
for for dealing with vectors and
and this tool these tools are the
so-called dot product and cross product
so how many people know what dot product
is okay that's better so I'll go quickly
over this by the way an important point
is that I try to do all of this in full
generality in other words in the
three-dimensional space so you see that
I'm writing everything in space I have
three coordinates my vector has three
components and so on but you can do the
same analysis on the plane if you are on
the plane if you are on the plane you
can also represent vectors in a very
similar way the only thing that will be
different is that you will be missing
the last coordinate the last component
that's all right because now you will
have two coordinates x and y you can
still talk about vectors on the plane
and you can transport this vector to the
in such a way that its initial point is
the origin and then you will have two
coordinates if at some point P you'll
have two coordinates X zero Y zero and
so your vector let's call it again a
sector a would be written as X 0 y 0 so
see just to just two components instead
of three so if you do a homework
exercise and you are given a vector in
this form that's how you know right away
that it's a vector on the plane and not
in space because you only have two
components or you can also write it as I
x0 times I plus y0 times J where one
more time
I and J are unit vectors in the X
direction and the y direction so the
same same kind of representation on the
plane is in space now I will talk about
dot product and cross product and those
products also is perfectly well defined
and on the plane you for most a very
similar but I will not write them they
will be easy to derive by using the
foremost increase in the
three-dimensional space a cross product
the next iteration that will introduce
only my extends in space not on the
plane
so will only work with it in space okay
so what's the cross what's the dot
product first first comes the dot
product
so you've got two vectors and a dot
product is a certain operation okay it's
a certain iteration where you're given
two vectors and you produce a number so
this is very important
you start with two vectors but you get
not a vector but you get a number this
is different from say taking the sum of
two vectors the sum of two vectors is
again a vector you start with two
vectors you get a vector also a scalar
multiple or multiplication by a number C
times a you start with a number and
vector and the end result is a vector so
when you think about all these
operations addition scalar
multiplication don't throw the
cross-product the first thing you should
remember is what is the input and what
is the output usually has two inputs and
one output like some addition to inputs
both are vectors output also vector
right so those product likewise is an
operation you know you can think of it
as a kind of a black box the black box
there are two inputs and there is one
output so there is some rule something
happens here so it eats two vectors and
spits out a number okay so the two
inputs are vector and another vector
vector 1 and vector 2 and output is a
number so I have to give you the rule
how this black box box works and here
the important point is that there are
two ways to represent this rule which is
actually very nice because then you can
compare them and you can derive some
useful information about vectors which
we'll use so what is the what is the
rule for the dot product so the rule
number rule number one yes now I would
like to draw to draw them on the plane
or in space in space so I'd well hello I
always draw everything on the plane
because that's all I got I got the
blackboard and thank goodness because
the three-dimensional thing would be a
much more difficult but now I have with
two vectors a and B and I would like to
give you a rule how to produce a number
out of them and so there are two rules
the rule number one we'll only use
genetic information about them so it
will be kind of geometric formula so
what I'll use is the magnitude of the
two vectors you see this one has a
magnitude which again is just the length
of this point of interval and this one
also has a length has a length or
magnitude sometimes I call the rank
sometimes magnitude it's the same thing
and there is one more piece of genetic
information namely the angle between
them now it's a sharp angle but actually
in general it could be obtuse angle they
could even be opposite to each other but
anyway there is an angle between them so
the dot product first of all the
notation for it is if this one if this
one is a and this one is B this is
called a dot B which is why it's called
a dot product
all right what what's the worry what is
it it is the length of the first one
times the length of the second one times
the cosine of the angle between them
this is a vector this is a vector this
is a number this is number this is a
number I take the product of its three
numbers so we see the number is promised
I start with two vectors I get a number
that's the dot product rule number two
up to now we have not used algebraic
representation of a vector now the break
representation of a vector has to you
know would have two different ways to to
package this information about the
vector by using these three numbers x0
y0 and z0 which is obtained in this way
so let's suppose that a
is x-one y-one and z-one
share it let me um let me write it in a
different board so that semester then
rule number two - all right here rule
number two is that a dot B is x1 times
x2 plus y1 times y2 plus z1 times z2 in
other words I take the x-coordinates and
multiply them I take the y-coordinates
and multiply them and I take the Z
coordinates and multiply them it's very
easy just like this multiply multiply
multiply add them up that's the number I
get and it's sort of it looks better
with a miracle the fact that the two
definitions two rules are actually
equivalent to each other and but it's
actually very easy to prove it's very
easy to prove that this implies this by
using this presentation
[Applause]
actually maybe if the direction I might
might actually be worthwhile
what's while doing this to give you
exactly the funny thing is in the book
they explain it in the opposite
direction from rule to rule one which is
much more difficult so I think it's
actually much better to to take the rule
the first rule as a definition and
that's also in the case that the best
recognition is dramatic because it has a
nice interpretation and usually has a
much deeper meaning
right here it's something which has to
do with the structure of the vectors and
the position of the vectors the way they
are situated on the plane or in space
whereas the second definition is
algebraic and it's really a working
definition is something which is very
useful in calculation but might not be
so useful for conceptual understanding
of what we are calculating so usually
the right way to go is from the
geometric definition to the algebraic
definition and that's the way it works
here
so you see and I would like I think it's
a good idea to actually do this to
explain this to you because here I will
illustrate different rules of of dot
product in regards to addition of scalar
multiplication of vectors so you see
here's what I'm going to do I'm going to
rewrite this in a second way I'm going
to write that this X 1 I plus X 2 y 1 J
plus v 1k and likewise for the second
one so far I've done nothing I'm just
using an equivalent notation but but now
it might if you will see how that this
is actually better because what I'm
going to do is I'm going to calculate a
dot product by using the second
definition
okay so now it looks like a product of
two two things and it's tempting to open
the brackets the way we would normally
open the brackets if you were
calculating with numbers now a priori is
not clear that this is this is allowed
but in fact you can you can justify this
by using by using rule one so the point
is that actually we are allowed to open
the brackets in the same way as we open
the brackets when we do calculations
with numbers so when we open the
brackets we are going to end up with
each of these terms on each of the terms
in the first dot one of the terms on the
other side right so this is going to be
x one i dot x 2 i now in principle i
have to write down how many three times
three nine terms okay but I'm going to
save I'm going to save some time so I'm
going to just to see the following that
there will be terms of two different
kinds in one of them they will have
matching vectors like I dot I there will
be three of them x one I times X dot X
2i y 1j dot y 2j and z1 k dot z 2k right
so these are the three commands that I
will get which will involve the same two
vectors AI jajay KK and then I will have
cross terms I will have terms which will
involve say I and J or I and K and so on
so let me just write the first one of
them x1 I and you will see why I will
not need to write the rest of them x1 I
say x y 2j
and so on so there will be I mean I'm
skipping five more terms but all of them
are going to be cross terms so now I
have to calculate each of this
I'm going to calculate each of this
terms each of these nine terms
separately and for this we're going to
use the following rule that if I have x1
I say dot x2 i I can pull out the
numbers I can pull out the scalars out I
can pull out the scalars and put them
outside of the dot product right so
that's the same as x1 x2 times the dot
product of I and I so what's the dot
product of I and I I dot I here is my
vector I and I want to take dot product
with itself now the rule is that this is
going to be equal to the length of I
times the length of I times the cosine
of the angle between them but the angle
between them now is 0 right because I
take the same vector twice so this is
one this is one and the cosine of zero
is one so this is one the dot product of
I with I is one so the net result is x1
x2 so this first term gives me X 1 X 2
likewise the second term Y 1 J dot y 2 J
will give me y 1 y 2 because I will need
to calculate the dot product J dot J and
that's again one because J is a unit
vector same calculation and finally z1 K
dot z2 k will be z1 z2 so the first
three terms will give me exactly the
answer of them which appears in rule 2
x1 x2 plus y 1 y 2 plus z1 z2 what about
the cross terms let me calculate the
first one of them x1 i dot y 2j
that's x1 y2 times the dot product of I
and J and what's the dot product of I
and J that's zero right the reason is
that now the angle between them PI over
two and the cosine of PI over two is
zero so when I apply rule one I see that
either J is zero so all the cross terms
will disappear and I will end up with
rule number two so it is very easy to go
from from Row 1 to Row 2 this way and
now the main point is that you can
actually use you can put these two rules
together and this will allow you to find
the cosine of the angle between two
vectors when you just when you just know
once you know the three components right
because you can turn this you can turn
this around and you can say that the
cosine of the angle can be written as
the ratio of the dot product what is
this time I think I have one more minute
oh okay well you got the idea we can
turn this around
and calculate the cosine from knowing
the lengths and dot products
okay we'll continue on Thursday